---
layout: post
title: Why?
---
# The Power of a Why

Why?

[Why can't you divide by zero?]({{ "Why can't you divide by zero?" | page }})

There are a lot of answers that people may give to this question.

<!--TODO: Replace this with pythagoreas.-->
- <span>Because it's infinite.</span>{:.wrong}
- Because removing nothing from something doesn't *do* anything.
- By definition.

<aside>This one is just wrong. The problem is not infinities, but
discontinuities.</aside>{:.wrong}

Or, even worse, they'll *prove* it to you.

There's nothing worse than a proof when you're looking for
a <span>why</span>{:.simplifience}. A proof can convince you of something. But
there's a chasm -- a huge chasm -- between *believing* something and
*understanding* it.

A proof gives you confidence that a thing is correct, but it does not give you
the <span>why</span>{:.simplifience} of it. No, a why is far stronger than
a proof. With a proof you can know that a thing is correct. <span>With a why you
can create a proof from scratch.</span>{:.compsci}

<aside>All you computer scientists know that it's far easier to verify a proof
than to create one. You can verify a proof in polynomial time, but creating
a proof is NP-Complete.</aside>{:.compsci}

Here we strive for whys, not merely proofs. I am of the opinion that a motivated
person can do more with a handful of solid whys than with all the verified
proofs in the world.

The problem, of course, is that whys are not always universal. Proofs are
universal; they work everywhere. But what's a why to me might seem trivial or
tautological to you. <!--TODO: Link Feynman here.-->

I can only do my best.
