---
layout: post
follows:
- The Beginning
title: Numbers
---
So we start with mathematics. We're going to start from the very, very
beginning. You've probably been taught things that are very wrong.

So let's start with your old friend, the number line:

<!--TODO: Number line.-->

Now, here's a question for you.

What are numbers?

No, seriously. [Meditate](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Meditation) on it for
a moment.

<aside>I'll be prefixing meditations with "Meditation:" from now on. Pause and
whisper your answers out loud, first. You might be surprised.</aside>{:.info}

Honestly. I'll wait. What are numbers?

<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>

Now.

Is ½ a number?

Surely, it is. It's one half. It's not a *whole* number, but it's still
a number, right?

...

Right?

Before I answer, consider this: You have four apples in a bowl. You can add
apples to the bowl and remove apples from the bowl. The apples are acting like
numbers. If you start with four and add two, then you have six. If you proceed
to eat ½, you have 5½ left over. So ½ certainly seems like it's a number.

Ok, now consider the restaurants on your way to work. There are four, and they
*also* act like numbers. If two more open, then there will be six. Now, let's
say that the largest restaurant sells ½ its floor space to a boutique. How many
restaurants are there on your way to work?

Still 6.

What's going on here?

> [Meditation](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Meditation): Is ½ a number, or is it
> not? Why did it work in one case but not the other?

It's a trick question. ½ is sometimes a number, and sometimes it's not. It
depends *how much number* you're using.

You may be a bit <span>confused</span>{:.simplifience} right now. If you were
taught in the current math curricula you're probably under the impression that
numbers are sacred, and that they're stuffed to the gills with weird features.
You start out with integers and then learn that there's negatives, then
fractions, then irrationals, and if you made it that far you get thoroughly
baffled by the so-called "imaginaries" (as if some numbers are more concrete
than others).

<aside>Embrace that feeling.</aside>{:.simplifience}

This isn't the case *at all*. Numbers aren't *real*, you see. They're only
useful when they're applied to a situation. So whether not ½ is a number depends
upon what situation it's being applied to.

Consider again the apple bowl above. It starts with four apples in it. Someone
comes and adds two more apples. How many apples are in the bowl?

Six, obviously. But why? Because four plus two is six? What does that have to do
with apples? Numbers are imaginary, after all. There's no such thing as
a "two" in the real world. If you ground up the entire universe,
there would be not a single iota of "two" to be found. Not anywhere.

> [Meditation](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Meditation): So why are you so
> confident that there are six apples in the bowl?

Because *the apples are acting like numbers*.

You've learned how numbers act: they don't merge willy nilly or disappear into
thin air. They follow certain rules. And, *when apples are following the same
rules*, then things that are true about numbers are true about apples.

Notice, however, that apples don't act *exactly* like numbers. What if you wait
twenty years before putting the two new apples in the bowl? Now you've lost the
original four. Or if someone eats an apple while you're waiting, you might only
have five at the end. Or perhaps the bowl has a hole in it! Or maybe someone
else is adding apples too, and you end up with *more* than six.

The point is, apples don't always act like numbers. But *when they do*, you can
use numbers *instead* of apples to answer your questions. This is *incredibly
useful*, because you don't have to re-invent addition the moment that you start
to crave oranges instead of apples.

And this brings us back to the elusive number ½. Is it a number? Well, *it
depends upon the situation*. Because remember, there's no such thing as real
numbers in the real world. So you have to ask yourself:

> Are the things I'm counting divisible into two?

If there's a good analogy, like with apples, then ½ <span>makes
sense</span>{:.rigor}. If there's not, like with restaurants, then ½ is
meaningless. A restaurant can't be divided in half: it can expand and shrink,
but it's either a restaurant or it's not. ½ doesn't have any meaning.

<aside>Of course, you probably can't cut an apple perfectly in half, so you
can't trust all of the properties of ½ (the number) to hold for ½ (the apple).
It's all about how good your analogies are.</aside>{:.rigor}

Unless you <span>invent a meaning for it</span>{:.info}. Because *that's what
it's all about*. It's about finding patterns and figuring them out. It's about
learning something about a pattern and then applying it to everything else that
follows that pattern, even if imperfectly.

<aside>I know you pedants are already doing this. "What about a restaurant
that's open half the hours? Or half the days of the week? Or only at night?
Or..."</aside>{:.info}

So numbers are just another tool. They're a pattern that is, admittedly,
everywhere. But most things in our daily lives don't *quite* act like perfect
numbers. Apples can be eaten. Clouds merge and flow into each other. Cars break
down. Sure there are some pure numbers around -- money, for instance, is
something that we designed to act like theoretical numbers. And computers are
heavily dependant upon pretending that an imperfect electrical signal is
actually a perfect "true" number.

But these are man-made things, fashioned after the mythical "number" we've
conceived. Is there anything in nature, any fundamental thing, that *truly* acts
like a number?

And, if so, how much number does it act like?
